Alternative mechanisms (#25)
boucadair/draft-xxx-ac-rate-policy-discovery: draft-brw-sconepro-rate-policy-discovery.md

|TBD2|OPTION_V4_NRLP|This-Document|
{: #iana-radius-dhcp title="New DHCP Option Permitted in the RADIUS DHCPv4-Options Attribute Registry"}

> # Alternative mechanisms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Alternative/Complementary Mechanisms
```

> In the event of bottlenecks in transportation networks, there are alternative mechanisms that provide information or help to reserve resources. These can be used within the bottleneck network or, in some cases, across network boundaries. The following sections give examples of such mechanisms and provide background information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of bottlenecks in a network, there are other mechanisms that provide information or help to reserve resources. These can be used within the bottleneck network or, in some cases, across network boundaries. The following sections give examples of such mechanisms and provide background information.
```

~~~~~
{: #radius-ex title="An Example of RADIUS NRLP Exchanges"}

# Alternative/Complementary Mechanisms

In the event of bottlenecks in a network, there are other mechanisms that provide information or help to reserve resources. These can be used within the bottleneck network or, in some cases, across network boundaries. The following sections give examples of such mechanisms and provide background information.

## L4S

> Low Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable Throughput (L4S) is a function defined in {{RFC9330}} to avoid queuing at bottlenecks by capacity-seeking congestion controllers of senders. Thus, it addresses the investigated use case of this document, which considers rate limiting, which typically involves queuing discipline at the rate limiting bottleneck. If the network and service support L4S, the use of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) is the measure used to inform the network protocol and/or service endpoint in use of impending congestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Low Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable Throughput (L4S) is an architecture defined in {{RFC9330}} to avoid queuing at bottlenecks by capacity-seeking congestion controllers of senders. L4S support addresses the investigated use case of this document, which considers rate limiting, which typically involves queuing discipline at the rate limiting bottleneck. If all involved elements (UE, network, and service) support L4S, the use of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) provides the measure used to inform the network protocol and/or service endpoints in use of impending congestion. Congestion detection and reaction may require some few RTTs, though to adjust to the network forwarding conditions.
```

As of 3GPP Rel. 18 (5G Advanced, {{TS-23.501}}), L4S is also defined for the 5G system (5GS) and can be used by UE and its services, but also for external parties of the 5GS by exposure of congestion information.

## Network Slicing {#ns}

One measure for guaranteeing resources in networks is network slicing. This is achieved by configuring certain resources , including adequate QoS setup for communication streams, which are taken into account in packet schedulers along the transport path, e.g., the RAN air interface.

Network slicing is considered by the 3GPP for 5G {{TS-23.501}} (an equivalent can be achieved in 4G by configuring QFI values), the IETF {{RFC9543}} for transport networks, and BBF {{TR-470}} for wireline access. A realization model in transport networks is detailed in {{?I-D.ietf-teas-5g-ns-ip-mpls}}.

> L4S {{L4S}} can be used for the realization of a network slice. Network slices properties (e.g., throughput) can be retrieved from an operator network by third parties via a network API {{network_api}} (e.g., 3GPP NEF).

Author: ```suggestion
L4S {{L4S}} can be used for the realization of a network slice. Network slices properties (e.g., throughput) can be retrieved from an operator network or configured by third parties via a network API {{network_api}} (e.g., 3GPP NEF).
```
Shouldn't we emphasize also the configuration of network slices, e.g. by VoD providers, to achieve smooth playback?

Reviewer: This can be mentioned as an example.

~~~~~
{: #radius-ex title="An Example of RADIUS NRLP Exchanges"}

# Alternative/Complementary Mechanisms

In the event of bottlenecks in a network, there are other mechanisms that provide information or help to reserve resources. These can be used within the bottleneck network or, in some cases, across network boundaries. The following sections give examples of such mechanisms and provide background information.

## L4S {#L4S}

> Low Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable Throughput (L4S) is an architecture defined in {{RFC9330}} to avoid queuing at bottlenecks by capacity-seeking congestion controllers of senders. L4S support addresses the investigated use case of this document, which considers rate limiting, which typically involves queuing discipline at the rate limiting bottleneck. If all involved elements (UE, network, and service) support L4S, the use of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) provides the measure used to inform the network protocol and/or service endpoints in use of impending congestion. Congestion detection and reaction may require some few RTTs, though to adjust to the network forwarding conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Low Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable Throughput (L4S) is an architecture defined in {{RFC9330}} to avoid queuing at bottlenecks by capacity-seeking congestion controllers of senders. L4S support addresses the investigated use case of this document, which considers rate limiting, which typically involves queuing discipline at the rate limiting bottleneck. If all involved elements (UE, network, and service) support L4S, the use of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) provides the measure used to inform the network protocol and/or service endpoints in use of impending congestion. Congestion detection and reaction may require a few RTTs to adjust to the network forwarding conditions.
```

> As of 3GPP Rel. 18 (5G Advanced, {{TS-23.501}}), L4S is also defined for the 5G system (5GS) and can be used by UE and its services, but also for external parties of the 5GS by exposure of congestion information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of 3GPP Rel. 18 (5G Advanced, {{TS-23.501}}), L4S is also defined for the 5G system (5GS) and can be used by UE and its services, and for external parties of the 5GS by exposure of congestion information.
```

## Network Slicing {#ns}

> One measure for guaranteeing resources in networks is network slicing. This is achieved by configuring certain resources , including adequate QoS setup for communication streams, which are taken into account in packet schedulers along the transport path, e.g., the RAN air interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One measure for guaranteeing resources in networks is network slicing. This is achieved by configuring certain resources like adequate QoS setup for communication streams, which are taken into account in packet schedulers along the transport path. e.g., the RAN air interface.
```

> Network slicing is considered by the 3GPP for 5G {{TS-23.501}} (an equivalent can be achieved in 4G by configuring QFI values), the IETF {{RFC9543}} for transport networks, and BBF {{TR-470}} for wireline access. A realization model in transport networks is detailed in {{?I-D.ietf-teas-5g-ns-ip-mpls}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Network slicing is considered by 3GPP for 5G {{TS-23.501}} (an equivalent can be achieved in 4G by configuring QFI values), by IETF {{RFC9543}} for transport networks, and by BBF {{TR-470}} for wireline access. A realization model in transport networks is detailed in {{?I-D.ietf-teas-5g-ns-ip-mpls}}.
```

As of 3GPP Rel. 18 (5G Advanced, {{TS-23.501}}), L4S is also defined for the 5G system (5GS) and can be used by UE and its services, but also for external parties of the 5GS by exposure of congestion information.

## Network Slicing {#ns}

One measure for guaranteeing resources in networks is network slicing. This is achieved by configuring certain resources , including adequate QoS setup for communication streams, which are taken into account in packet schedulers along the transport path, e.g., the RAN air interface.

Network slicing is considered by the 3GPP for 5G {{TS-23.501}} (an equivalent can be achieved in 4G by configuring QFI values), the IETF {{RFC9543}} for transport networks, and BBF {{TR-470}} for wireline access. A realization model in transport networks is detailed in {{?I-D.ietf-teas-5g-ns-ip-mpls}}.

L4S {{L4S}} can be used for the realization of a network slice. Network slices properties (e.g., throughput) can be retrieved from an operator network by third parties via a network API {{network_api}} (e.g., 3GPP NEF).

## 3GPP UE Route Selection Policy {#ursp}

> UE Route Selection Policy (URSP) is a feature specified in 3GPP for 5G which matches and routes traffic based on a selection descriptor and a route descriptor and is further described in {{TS-23.503}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UE Route Selection Policy (URSP) is a feature specified in 3GPP to match and forward traffic based upon a selection descriptor and a route descriptor as further detailed in {{TS-23.503}}.
```

> Specified traffic descriptors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specified traffic descriptors may be:
```

* Application
* IP
* Domain
* Non-IP
* DNN
* Connection Capabilities
* PIN ID
* Connectivity Group ID

> Specified route selection descriptors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specified route selection descriptors: 
```

Reviewer: PDU type is mandatory since rel 16 (wasn't in release 15)

* SSC Mode
* Network Slice
* DNN

> * PDU Session Type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Non-Seamless Offload indication
* Access Type preference

> * ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> URSP rules that contain both descriptors can be announced from the carrier network to the UE or preconfigured in the UE, possibly subscription-based. In terms of this document, this can be used to identify services in the UE and network that are suffering from today's rate limiting policies, and to provide routes with clear characteristics or no rate limiting. URSP might also be triggered by the usage of network APIs {{network_api}} and combined with network slicing {{ns}}, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
URSP rules that contain both descriptors can be announced from the provider network to a UE or preconfigured in the UE, possibly subscription-based. These rules can be used to identify services in the UE and to provide routes with explicit  characteristics. URSP rules might also be triggered by the usage of network APIs {{network_api}} and combined with network slicing {{ns}}, for example.
```
